
Dear Dr. Skalka:

Manuscript ID CSUR-2006-0055.R1 entitled "Authorization in Trust
Management: Features and Foundations" which you submitted to the Computing
Surveys, has been reviewed. The comments of the reviewer(s) are included at
the bottom of this letter.

The reviewer(s) have recommended publication, but also suggest some minor
revisions to your manuscript. The requested revisions are minor and can
therefore be taken care at satisfaction without problems. I am therefore
recommending that the paper be accepted provided that all the necessary
revisions are taken care of at complete satisfaction. I therefore invite
you to revise the manuscript making sure to satisfy all the comments of the
reviewers and resubmit the mauscript together with a letter explaining how
you have revised the manuscript to address the (minor) reviewers' concerns.

To revise your manuscript, log into http://mc.manuscriptcentral.com/csur
and enter your Author Center, where you will find your manuscript title
listed under "Manuscripts with Decisions." Under "Actions," click on
"Create a Revision." Your manuscript number has been appended to denote a
revision.

You will be unable to make your revisions on the originally submitted
version of the manuscript. Instead, revise your manuscript using a word
processing program and save it on your computer. Please also highlight the
changes to your manuscript within the document by using the track changes
mode in MS Word or by using bold or colored text.

Once the revised manuscript is prepared, you can upload it and submit it
through your Author Center.

When submitting your revised manuscript, you will be able to respond to the
comments made by the reviewer(s) in the space provided. You can use this
space to document any changes you make to the original manuscript. In order
to expedite the processing of the revised manuscript, please be as specific
as possible in your response to the reviewer(s).

IMPORTANT: Your original files are available to you when you upload your
revised manuscript. Please delete any redundant files before completing the
submission.

Because we are trying to facilitate timely publication of manuscripts
submitted to the Computing Surveys, your revised manuscript should be
uploaded as soon as possible. If it is not possible for you to submit your
revision in a reasonable amount of time, we may have to consider your paper
as a new submission.

In the interest of timely publication, I request that you return your
revised manuscript by September 30, 2007. If the paper is not returned by
this deadline we will consider you are not interested in submitting your
paper anymore and any re-submission will be considered as a new submission.
If you feel you need more time pls let me know.

Once again, thank you for submitting your manuscript to the Computing
Surveys and I look forward to receiving your revision.

Sincerely,

-p

Prof. Pierangela Samarati
Associate Editor, Computing Surveys
samarati@dti.unimi.it


Reviewer(s)' Comments to Author:
------------------------------------------------------------

Referee: 1

The paper road map at the top of page 4 describes the contents of the
remaining sections of the paper, but omits section 6. Is this intentional,
since later in 2.1 they mention the topic of section 6?

Page 5 - x509 should read X.509

Throughout the paper, citations are treated as nouns (e.g., An example in
[X] illustrates...; In addition [X] gives requirements ...;). I tend to
avoid this style personally, but will not insist that others do the same.
The first paragraph on page 44 contains "...languages is given by Seamons
et al. in [Seamons et al. 2002]." To be more consistent with the rest of
the paper, it should read "...languages is given in [Seamons et al. 2002].

------------------------------------------------------------

Referee: 2

As I said above, the discussion of trust negotiation frameworks is very
short. The reader with no prior experience of those systems may not see the
reasons of the ratings reported in tables I and II. While an encoding of
the running example in those frameworks would require language details that
might make the paper significantly longer, there is probably space enough
for at least some brief hints and pointers to the features that justify the
tables.

Minor comments:

- definition of Requester (p.5): perhaps it is more precise to say
  "possibly" or "typically" non-local

- def. of Role membership (p.6): I would prefer something like "[...] the
  group of entities that can activate [alternatively: play] a role"

------------------------------------------------------------

Referee: 3

I recommend that the paper be accepted after correcting a few typos that
the editor can check.
